doc/mgr/prometheus.rst, before:

.. _mgr-prometheus:

=================
Prometheus Module
=================

The Manager ``prometheus`` module implements a Prometheus exporter to expose
Ceph performance counters from the collection point in the Manager.  The
Manager receives ``MMgrReport`` messages from all ``MgrClient`` processes
(including mons and OSDs) with performance counter schema data and counter
data, and maintains a circular buffer of the latest samples.  This module
listens on an HTTP endpoint and retrieves the latest sample of every counter
when scraped.  The HTTP path and query parameters are ignored. All extant
counters for all reporting entities are returned in the Prometheus exposition
format.  (See the Prometheus `documentation
<https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats/#text-format-details>`_.)

Enabling Prometheus output
==========================

Enable the ``prometheus`` module by running the below command :

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph mgr module enable prometheus

Configuration
-------------

.. note::

    The ``prometheus`` Manager module must be restarted to apply configuration changes.

.. mgr_module:: prometheus
.. confval:: server_addr
.. confval:: server_port
.. confval:: scrape_interval
.. confval:: cache
.. confval:: stale_cache_strategy
.. confval:: rbd_stats_pools
.. confval:: rbd_stats_pools_refresh_interval
.. confval:: standby_behaviour
.. confval:: standby_error_status_code
.. confval:: exclude_perf_counters

By default the module will accept HTTP requests on port ``9283`` on all IPv4
and IPv6 addresses on the host.  The port and listen address are
configurable with ``ceph config set``, with keys
``mgr/prometheus/server_addr`` and ``mgr/prometheus/server_port``.  This port
is registered with Prometheus's `registry
<https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/wiki/Default-port-allocations>`_.

.. prompt:: bash #
   
   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/server_addr 0.0.0.0
   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/server_port 9283

.. warning::

    The :confval:`mgr/prometheus/scrape_interval` of this module should match
    Prometheus' scrape interval to work properly.

The scrape interval in the module is used for caching purposes
and to determine when a cache is stale.

It is not recommended to use a scrape interval below 10 seconds.  It is
recommended to use 15 seconds as scrape interval, though, in some cases it
might be useful to increase the scrape interval.

To set a different scrape interval in the Prometheus module, set
``scrape_interval`` to the desired value:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/scrape_interval 20

On large clusters (>1000 OSDs), the time to fetch the metrics may become
significant.  Without the cache, the Prometheus manager module could, especially
in conjunction with multiple Prometheus instances, overload the manager and lead
to unresponsive or crashing Ceph Manager instances.  Hence, the cache is enabled
by default.  This means that there is a possibility that the cache becomes
stale.  The cache is considered stale when the time to fetch the metrics from
Ceph exceeds the configured :confval:`mgr/prometheus/scrape_interval`.

If that is the case, **a warning will be logged** and the module will either
respond with a 503 HTTP status code (service unavailable) or
it will return the content of the cache, even though it might be stale.

This behavior can be configured. By default, it will return a 503 HTTP status
code (service unavailable). You can set other options using the ``ceph config
set`` commands.

To configure the module to respond with possibly stale data, set
the cache strategy to ``return``:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/stale_cache_strategy return

To configure the module to respond with "service unavailable", set it to ``fail``:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/stale_cache_strategy fail

If you are confident that you don't require the cache, you can disable it:

.. prompt:: bash $

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/cache false

If you are using the ``prometheus`` module behind a reverse proxy or
load balancer, you can simplify discovery of the active instance by switching
to ``error``-mode:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/standby_behaviour error

If set, the ``prometheus`` module will respond with a HTTP error when requesting ``/``
from the standby instance. The default error code is 500, but you can configure
the HTTP response code with:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/standby_error_status_code 503

Valid error codes are between 400-599.

To switch back to the default behaviour, simply set the config key to ``default``:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/standby_behaviour default

.. _prometheus-rbd-io-statistics:

Ceph Health Checks
------------------

The Manager ``prometheus`` module tracks and maintains a history of Ceph health checks,
exposing them to the Prometheus server as discrete metrics. This allows Alertmanager
rules to be configured for specific health check events.

The metrics take the following form:

::

    # HELP ceph_health_detail healthcheck status by type (0=inactive, 1=active)
    # TYPE ceph_health_detail gauge
    ceph_health_detail{name="OSDMAP_FLAGS",severity="HEALTH_WARN"} 0.0
    ceph_health_detail{name="OSD_DOWN",severity="HEALTH_WARN"} 1.0
    ceph_health_detail{name="PG_DEGRADED",severity="HEALTH_WARN"} 1.0

The health check history may be retrieved and cleared by running the following commands:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph healthcheck history ls [--format {plain|json|json-pretty}]
   ceph healthcheck history clear

The ``ceph healthcheck ls`` command provides an overview of the health checks that the cluster has
encountered since the last ``clear`` command was issued:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph healthcheck history ls

::

    Healthcheck Name          First Seen (UTC)      Last seen (UTC)       Count  Active
    OSDMAP_FLAGS              2021/09/16 03:17:47   2021/09/16 22:07:40       2    No
    OSD_DOWN                  2021/09/17 00:11:59   2021/09/17 00:11:59       1   Yes
    PG_DEGRADED               2021/09/17 00:11:59   2021/09/17 00:11:59       1   Yes
    3 health check(s) listed


RBD IO statistics
-----------------

The ``prometheus`` module can optionally collect RBD per-image IO statistics by enabling
dynamic OSD performance counters. Statistics are gathered for all images
in the pools that are specified by the ``mgr/prometheus/rbd_stats_pools``
configuration parameter. The parameter is a comma or space separated list
of ``pool[/namespace]`` entries. If the RBD namespace is not specified,
statistics are collected for all namespaces in the pool.

To enable collection of stats for RBD pools named ``pool1``, ``pool2`` and ``poolN``:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/rbd_stats_pools "pool1,pool2,poolN"

A wildcard can be used to indicate all pools or namespaces:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/rbd_stats_pools "*"

The module maintains a list of all available images by scanning the specified
pools and namespaces. The refresh period is
configurable via the ``mgr/prometheus/rbd_stats_pools_refresh_interval``
parameter, which defaults to 300 seconds (5 minutes). The module will
force refresh earlier if it detects statistics from a previously unknown
RBD image.

To set the sync interval to 10 minutes run the following command:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/rbd_stats_pools_refresh_interval 600

Ceph daemon performance counters metrics
-----------------------------------------

With the introduction of the ``ceph-exporter`` daemon, the ``prometheus`` module will no longer export Ceph daemon
perf counters as Prometheus metrics by default. However, one may re-enable exporting these metrics by setting
the module option ``exclude_perf_counters`` to ``false``:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/exclude_perf_counters false

Statistic names and labels
==========================

These Prometheus stats names are the Ceph native names with
illegal characters ``.``, ``-`` and ``::`` translated to ``_``,
and ``ceph_`` prepended.

All daemon statistics have a ``ceph_daemon`` label with a value
that identifies the type and ID of the daemon they come from,
for example ``osd.123``.
A given metric may be reported by multiple types of daemon, so for
example when when querying an OSD RocksDB stats, you may constrain
the query with a pattern of the form ``ceph_daemon=~'osd.*'`` so that Monitor
RocksDB metrics are excluded.

Cluster statistics (i.e. those global to the Ceph cluster)
have labels appropriate to the entity for which they are reported.  For example,
metrics relating to pools have a ``pool_id`` label.

Long-running averages that represent Ceph statistic histograms
are represented by paired ``<name>_sum`` and ``<name>_count`` metrics.
This is similar to how histograms are represented in `Prometheus <https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#histogram>`_
and they are  treated `similarly <https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/histograms/>`_.

Pool and OSD metadata series
----------------------------

Series are exported to facilitate displaying and querying on
certain metadata fields.

Pools have a ``ceph_pool_metadata`` metric of the following form:

::

    ceph_pool_metadata{pool_id="2",name="cephfs_metadata_a"} 1.0

OSDs have a ``ceph_osd_metadata`` metric of the following form:

::

    ceph_osd_metadata{cluster_addr="172.21.9.34:6802/19096",device_class="ssd",ceph_daemon="osd.0",public_addr="172.21.9.34:6801/19096",weight="1.0"} 1.0


Correlating drive statistics with node_exporter
-----------------------------------------------

Ceph cluster Prometheus metrics are used in conjunction
with generic host metrics from the Prometheus ``node_exporter``.

To enable correlation of Ceph OSD statistics with ``node_exporter``'s
drive statistics, Ceph creates series of the below form:

::

    ceph_disk_occupation_human{ceph_daemon="osd.0", device="sdd", exported_instance="myhost"}

To query drive metrics by OSD ID, use either the ``and`` operator or
the ``*`` operator in your Prometheus query. All metadata
metrics (like ``ceph_disk_occupation_human``) have the value ``1`` so that they
combine in a neutral fashion with the PromQL ``*`` operator. Using ``*``
allows the use of the ``group_left`` and ``group_right`` grouping modifiers
so that the results have additional labels from one side of the query.

See the `prometheus documentation`__ for more information about constructing
PromQL queries and exploring interactively via the Prometheus expression browser..

__ https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics

For example we can run a query like the below:

::

    rate(node_disk_written_bytes_total[30s]) and
    on (device,instance) ceph_disk_occupation_human{ceph_daemon="osd.0"}

Out of the box the above query will not return any metrics since the ``instance`` labels of
both metrics don't match. The ``instance`` label of ``ceph_disk_occupation_human``
will be the currently active Manager.

The following sections outline two approaches to remedy this.

.. note::

    If you need to group on the ``ceph_daemon`` label instead of ``device`` and
    ``instance`` labels, using ``ceph_disk_occupation_human`` may not work reliably.
    It is advised that you use ``ceph_disk_occupation`` instead.

    The difference is that ``ceph_disk_occupation_human`` may group several OSDs
    into the value of a single ``ceph_daemon`` label in cases where multiple OSDs
    share a device.

Use label_replace
=================

The ``label_replace`` function (cp.
`label_replace documentation <https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/functions/#label_replace>`_)
can add a label to, or alter a label of, a metric within a query.

To correlate an OSD with its drives' write rate, a query of the following form can be used:

::

    label_replace(
        rate(node_disk_written_bytes_total[30s]),
        "exported_instance",
        "$1",
        "instance",
        "(.*):.*"
    ) and on (device, exported_instance) ceph_disk_occupation_human{ceph_daemon="osd.0"}

Configuring Prometheus server
=============================

honor_labels
------------

To enable Ceph to output properly-labeled data relating to any host,
use the ``honor_labels`` setting when adding the Manager endpoints
to your Prometheus configuration.

This instructs Ceph to export the proper ``instance`` labels without Prometheus
overwriting them at ingest. Without this setting, Prometheus applies an ``instance`` label
that includes the hostname and port of the endpoint from which each metric is scraped.
Because Ceph clusters have multiple Manager daemons, this results in an
``instance`` label that changes  when the active Manager daemon
changes.

If this is undesirable, a custom ``instance`` label can be set in the
Prometheus target configuration. You might wish to set it to the hostname
of your first Manager, or something arbitrary like ``ceph_cluster``.

node_exporter hostname labels
-----------------------------

Set your ``instance`` labels to match what appears in Ceph's OSD metadata
in the ``instance`` field.  This is generally the short hostname of the node.

This is only necessary if you want to correlate Ceph stats with host stats,
but you may find it useful to do so to facilitate correlation of
historical data in the future.

Example configuration
---------------------

This example shows a deployment with a Manager and ``node_exporter`` placed
on a server named ``senta04``. Note that this requires one
to add an appropriate and unique ``instance`` label to each ``node_exporter`` target.

This is just an example: there are other ways to configure Prometheus
scrape targets and label rewrite rules.

prometheus.yml
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

    global:
      scrape_interval:     15s
      evaluation_interval: 15s

    scrape_configs:
      - job_name: 'node'
        file_sd_configs:
          - files:
            - node_targets.yml
      - job_name: 'ceph'
        honor_labels: true
        file_sd_configs:
          - files:
            - ceph_targets.yml


ceph_targets.yml
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


::

    [
        {
            "targets": [ "senta04.mydomain.com:9283" ],
            "labels": {}
        }
    ]


node_targets.yml
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

    [
        {
            "targets": [ "senta04.mydomain.com:9100" ],
            "labels": {
                "instance": "senta04"
            }
        }
    ]


Notes
=====

Counters and gauges are exported. Histograms and long-running
averages are currently not exported.  It is possible that Ceph's 2-D histograms
could be reduced to two separate 1-D histograms, and that long-running averages
could be exported as metrics of Prometheus' ``Summary`` type.

Timestamps, as with many exporters, are set by Prometheus at ingest to
the Prometheus server's scrape time. Prometheus expects that it is polling the
actual counter process synchronously.  It is possible to supply a
timestamp along with the stat report, but the Prometheus team strongly
advises against this.  This would mean that timestamps would be delayed by
an unpredictable amount. It is not clear if this would be problematic,
but it is worth knowing about.

Commit message:

mgr/prometheus: prune stale health checks, compress output
This patch introduces several improvements to the Prometheus module:

 - Introduces `HealthHistory._prune()` to drop stale and inactive health checks.
  Limits the in-memory healthcheck dict to a configurable max_entries (default 1000).
  TTL for stale entries is configurable via `healthcheck_history_stale_ttl` (default 3600s).

 - Refactors HealthHistory.check() to use a unified iteration over known and current checks,
  improving concurrency and minimizing redundant updates.

 - Use cherrypy.tools.gzip instead of manual gzip.compress() for cleaner
  HTTP compression with proper header handling and client negotiation.

 - Introduces new module options:
    - `healthcheck_history_max_entries`

 - Add proper error handling for CherryPy engine startup failures
 - Remove os._exit monkey patch in favor of proper exception handling
 - Remove manual Content-Type header setting (CherryPy handles automatically)

Fixes: https://tracker.ceph.com/issues/68989
Signed-off-by: Nitzan Mordechai <nmordech@redhat.com>

doc/mgr/prometheus.rst, after:

.. _mgr-prometheus:

=================
Prometheus Module
=================

The Manager ``prometheus`` module implements a Prometheus exporter to expose
Ceph performance counters from the collection point in the Manager.  The
Manager receives ``MMgrReport`` messages from all ``MgrClient`` processes
(including mons and OSDs) with performance counter schema data and counter
data, and maintains a circular buffer of the latest samples.  This module
listens on an HTTP endpoint and retrieves the latest sample of every counter
when scraped.  The HTTP path and query parameters are ignored. All extant
counters for all reporting entities are returned in the Prometheus exposition
format.  (See the Prometheus `documentation
<https://prometheus.io/docs/instrumenting/exposition_formats/#text-format-details>`_.)

Enabling Prometheus output
==========================

Enable the ``prometheus`` module by running the below command :

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph mgr module enable prometheus

Configuration
-------------

.. note::

    The ``prometheus`` Manager module must be restarted to apply configuration changes.

.. mgr_module:: prometheus
.. confval:: server_addr
.. confval:: server_port
.. confval:: scrape_interval
.. confval:: cache
.. confval:: stale_cache_strategy
.. confval:: rbd_stats_pools
.. confval:: rbd_stats_pools_refresh_interval
.. confval:: standby_behaviour
.. confval:: standby_error_status_code
.. confval:: exclude_perf_counters
.. confval:: healthcheck_history_max_entries

By default the module will accept HTTP requests on port ``9283`` on all IPv4
and IPv6 addresses on the host.  The port and listen address are
configurable with ``ceph config set``, with keys
``mgr/prometheus/server_addr`` and ``mgr/prometheus/server_port``.  This port
is registered with Prometheus's `registry
<https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/wiki/Default-port-allocations>`_.

.. prompt:: bash #
   
   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/server_addr 0.0.0.0
   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/server_port 9283

.. warning::

    The :confval:`mgr/prometheus/scrape_interval` of this module should match
    Prometheus' scrape interval to work properly.

The scrape interval in the module is used for caching purposes
and to determine when a cache is stale.

It is not recommended to use a scrape interval below 10 seconds.  It is
recommended to use 15 seconds as scrape interval, though, in some cases it
might be useful to increase the scrape interval.

To set a different scrape interval in the Prometheus module, set
``scrape_interval`` to the desired value:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/scrape_interval 20

On large clusters (>1000 OSDs), the time to fetch the metrics may become
significant.  Without the cache, the Prometheus manager module could, especially
in conjunction with multiple Prometheus instances, overload the manager and lead
to unresponsive or crashing Ceph Manager instances.  Hence, the cache is enabled
by default.  This means that there is a possibility that the cache becomes
stale.  The cache is considered stale when the time to fetch the metrics from
Ceph exceeds the configured :confval:`mgr/prometheus/scrape_interval`.

If that is the case, **a warning will be logged** and the module will either
respond with a 503 HTTP status code (service unavailable) or
it will return the content of the cache, even though it might be stale.

This behavior can be configured. By default, it will return a 503 HTTP status
code (service unavailable). You can set other options using the ``ceph config
set`` commands.

To configure the module to respond with possibly stale data, set
the cache strategy to ``return``:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/stale_cache_strategy return

To configure the module to respond with "service unavailable", set it to ``fail``:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/stale_cache_strategy fail

If you are confident that you don't require the cache, you can disable it:

.. prompt:: bash $

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/cache false

If you are using the ``prometheus`` module behind a reverse proxy or
load balancer, you can simplify discovery of the active instance by switching
to ``error``-mode:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/standby_behaviour error

If set, the ``prometheus`` module will respond with a HTTP error when requesting ``/``
from the standby instance. The default error code is 500, but you can configure
the HTTP response code with:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/standby_error_status_code 503

Valid error codes are between 400-599.

To switch back to the default behaviour, simply set the config key to ``default``:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/standby_behaviour default

.. _prometheus-rbd-io-statistics:

Ceph Health Checks
------------------

The Manager ``prometheus`` module tracks and maintains a history of Ceph health checks,
exposing them to the Prometheus server as discrete metrics. This allows Alertmanager
rules to be configured for specific health check events.

The metrics take the following form:

::

    # HELP ceph_health_detail healthcheck status by type (0=inactive, 1=active)
    # TYPE ceph_health_detail gauge
    ceph_health_detail{name="OSDMAP_FLAGS",severity="HEALTH_WARN"} 0.0
    ceph_health_detail{name="OSD_DOWN",severity="HEALTH_WARN"} 1.0
    ceph_health_detail{name="PG_DEGRADED",severity="HEALTH_WARN"} 1.0

The module also maintains an in-memory history of health-check states.
By default the history retains a maximum of 1000 entries. This limit is configurable via the following runtime option:

  ``mgr/prometheus/healthcheck_history_max_entries`` - the maximum number of unique health check entries to track in memory (default: 1000).

This setting helps avoid unbounded memory growth in large or long-lived clusters.

The health check history may be retrieved and cleared by running the following commands:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph healthcheck history ls [--format {plain|json|json-pretty}]
   ceph healthcheck history clear

The ``ceph healthcheck ls`` command provides an overview of the health checks that the cluster has
encountered since the last ``clear`` command was issued:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph healthcheck history ls

::

    Healthcheck Name          First Seen (UTC)      Last seen (UTC)       Count  Active
    OSDMAP_FLAGS              2021/09/16 03:17:47   2021/09/16 22:07:40       2    No
    OSD_DOWN                  2021/09/17 00:11:59   2021/09/17 00:11:59       1   Yes
    PG_DEGRADED               2021/09/17 00:11:59   2021/09/17 00:11:59       1   Yes
    3 health check(s) listed


RBD IO statistics
-----------------

The ``prometheus`` module can optionally collect RBD per-image IO statistics by enabling
dynamic OSD performance counters. Statistics are gathered for all images
in the pools that are specified by the ``mgr/prometheus/rbd_stats_pools``
configuration parameter. The parameter is a comma or space separated list
of ``pool[/namespace]`` entries. If the RBD namespace is not specified,
statistics are collected for all namespaces in the pool.

To enable collection of stats for RBD pools named ``pool1``, ``pool2`` and ``poolN``:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/rbd_stats_pools "pool1,pool2,poolN"

A wildcard can be used to indicate all pools or namespaces:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/rbd_stats_pools "*"

The module maintains a list of all available images by scanning the specified
pools and namespaces. The refresh period is
configurable via the ``mgr/prometheus/rbd_stats_pools_refresh_interval``
parameter, which defaults to 300 seconds (5 minutes). The module will
force refresh earlier if it detects statistics from a previously unknown
RBD image.

To set the sync interval to 10 minutes run the following command:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/rbd_stats_pools_refresh_interval 600

Ceph daemon performance counters metrics
-----------------------------------------

With the introduction of the ``ceph-exporter`` daemon, the ``prometheus`` module will no longer export Ceph daemon
perf counters as Prometheus metrics by default. However, one may re-enable exporting these metrics by setting
the module option ``exclude_perf_counters`` to ``false``:

.. prompt:: bash #

   ceph config set mgr mgr/prometheus/exclude_perf_counters false

Statistic names and labels
==========================

These Prometheus stats names are the Ceph native names with
illegal characters ``.``, ``-`` and ``::`` translated to ``_``,
and ``ceph_`` prepended.

All daemon statistics have a ``ceph_daemon`` label with a value
that identifies the type and ID of the daemon they come from,
for example ``osd.123``.
A given metric may be reported by multiple types of daemon, so for
example when when querying an OSD RocksDB stats, you may constrain
the query with a pattern of the form ``ceph_daemon=~'osd.*'`` so that Monitor
RocksDB metrics are excluded.

Cluster statistics (i.e. those global to the Ceph cluster)
have labels appropriate to the entity for which they are reported.  For example,
metrics relating to pools have a ``pool_id`` label.

Long-running averages that represent Ceph statistic histograms
are represented by paired ``<name>_sum`` and ``<name>_count`` metrics.
This is similar to how histograms are represented in `Prometheus <https://prometheus.io/docs/concepts/metric_types/#histogram>`_
and they are  treated `similarly <https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/histograms/>`_.

Pool and OSD metadata series
----------------------------

Series are exported to facilitate displaying and querying on
certain metadata fields.

Pools have a ``ceph_pool_metadata`` metric of the following form:

::

    ceph_pool_metadata{pool_id="2",name="cephfs_metadata_a"} 1.0

OSDs have a ``ceph_osd_metadata`` metric of the following form:

::

    ceph_osd_metadata{cluster_addr="172.21.9.34:6802/19096",device_class="ssd",ceph_daemon="osd.0",public_addr="172.21.9.34:6801/19096",weight="1.0"} 1.0


Correlating drive statistics with node_exporter
-----------------------------------------------

Ceph cluster Prometheus metrics are used in conjunction
with generic host metrics from the Prometheus ``node_exporter``.

To enable correlation of Ceph OSD statistics with ``node_exporter``'s
drive statistics, Ceph creates series of the below form:

::

    ceph_disk_occupation_human{ceph_daemon="osd.0", device="sdd", exported_instance="myhost"}

To query drive metrics by OSD ID, use either the ``and`` operator or
the ``*`` operator in your Prometheus query. All metadata
metrics (like ``ceph_disk_occupation_human``) have the value ``1`` so that they
combine in a neutral fashion with the PromQL ``*`` operator. Using ``*``
allows the use of the ``group_left`` and ``group_right`` grouping modifiers
so that the results have additional labels from one side of the query.

See the `prometheus documentation`__ for more information about constructing
PromQL queries and exploring interactively via the Prometheus expression browser..

__ https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics

For example we can run a query like the below:

::

    rate(node_disk_written_bytes_total[30s]) and
    on (device,instance) ceph_disk_occupation_human{ceph_daemon="osd.0"}

Out of the box the above query will not return any metrics since the ``instance`` labels of
both metrics don't match. The ``instance`` label of ``ceph_disk_occupation_human``
will be the currently active Manager.

The following sections outline two approaches to remedy this.

.. note::

    If you need to group on the ``ceph_daemon`` label instead of ``device`` and
    ``instance`` labels, using ``ceph_disk_occupation_human`` may not work reliably.
    It is advised that you use ``ceph_disk_occupation`` instead.

    The difference is that ``ceph_disk_occupation_human`` may group several OSDs
    into the value of a single ``ceph_daemon`` label in cases where multiple OSDs
    share a device.

Use label_replace
=================

The ``label_replace`` function (cp.
`label_replace documentation <https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/functions/#label_replace>`_)
can add a label to, or alter a label of, a metric within a query.

To correlate an OSD with its drives' write rate, a query of the following form can be used:

::

    label_replace(
        rate(node_disk_written_bytes_total[30s]),
        "exported_instance",
        "$1",
        "instance",
        "(.*):.*"
    ) and on (device, exported_instance) ceph_disk_occupation_human{ceph_daemon="osd.0"}

Configuring Prometheus server
=============================

honor_labels
------------

To enable Ceph to output properly-labeled data relating to any host,
use the ``honor_labels`` setting when adding the Manager endpoints
to your Prometheus configuration.

This instructs Ceph to export the proper ``instance`` labels without Prometheus
overwriting them at ingest. Without this setting, Prometheus applies an ``instance`` label
that includes the hostname and port of the endpoint from which each metric is scraped.
Because Ceph clusters have multiple Manager daemons, this results in an
``instance`` label that changes  when the active Manager daemon
changes.

If this is undesirable, a custom ``instance`` label can be set in the
Prometheus target configuration. You might wish to set it to the hostname
of your first Manager, or something arbitrary like ``ceph_cluster``.

node_exporter hostname labels
-----------------------------

Set your ``instance`` labels to match what appears in Ceph's OSD metadata
in the ``instance`` field.  This is generally the short hostname of the node.

This is only necessary if you want to correlate Ceph stats with host stats,
but you may find it useful to do so to facilitate correlation of
historical data in the future.

Example configuration
---------------------

This example shows a deployment with a Manager and ``node_exporter`` placed
on a server named ``senta04``. Note that this requires one
to add an appropriate and unique ``instance`` label to each ``node_exporter`` target.

This is just an example: there are other ways to configure Prometheus
scrape targets and label rewrite rules.

prometheus.yml
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

    global:
      scrape_interval:     15s
      evaluation_interval: 15s

    scrape_configs:
      - job_name: 'node'
        file_sd_configs:
          - files:
            - node_targets.yml
      - job_name: 'ceph'
        honor_labels: true
        file_sd_configs:
          - files:
            - ceph_targets.yml


ceph_targets.yml
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


::

    [
        {
            "targets": [ "senta04.mydomain.com:9283" ],
            "labels": {}
        }
    ]


node_targets.yml
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

    [
        {
            "targets": [ "senta04.mydomain.com:9100" ],
            "labels": {
                "instance": "senta04"
            }
        }
    ]


Notes
=====

Counters and gauges are exported. Histograms and long-running
averages are currently not exported.  It is possible that Ceph's 2-D histograms
could be reduced to two separate 1-D histograms, and that long-running averages
could be exported as metrics of Prometheus' ``Summary`` type.

Timestamps, as with many exporters, are set by Prometheus at ingest to
the Prometheus server's scrape time. Prometheus expects that it is polling the
actual counter process synchronously.  It is possible to supply a
timestamp along with the stat report, but the Prometheus team strongly
advises against this.  This would mean that timestamps would be delayed by
an unpredictable amount. It is not clear if this would be problematic,
but it is worth knowing about.
